Christ, mercy and peace be unto you from our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, again, a portion of the Epistle reading assigned for today.
In Him, Jesus Christ, we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses according to the rich of His grace, which He lavished upon us, in all wisdom and insight making known to us the mystery of His will, according to His purpose, which He set forth in Christ.
You'll join me with the word of prayer.
Lord, God Heavenly Father, as we gather on this day, we ask that You would lead us to be people of wonder, people who reflect on and consider and spend time in this good news that we have received and heard this season, the good news of a child who has been born, and the one who would receive all of these great and noble titles, wonderful counselor and mighty God, prince of peace and everlasting Father.
Lord, let us to see Him as He is, the Son who was sent from heaven
to be our Savior.
Let us receive Him, reflect on Him, and spend time in His presence once again.
We pray now in Jesus' name.
Amen.
The congregation may be seated.
This is about the time of year, a week or two after Christmas, that I like to ask our kids.
Do you remember all the things you got for Christmas?
Do you remember all the presents that you got?
Can you name them?
Because maybe they'll get a couple, but I'm sure they would miss a few already by this time.
So how about you?
Do you remember all the things you got for Christmas?
If you got a few things for Christmas, maybe helpful for us to consider and remember the difference between those things that last and those things that don't.
The things that are fleeting in this world, which so many things are, and then the things that are eternal.
That's what we were really invited to see and consider this season, Jesus Christ, the one who's prophesied in Isaiah chapter nine called eternal father, almighty God, the one who would come and rule and would rule eternally forever with a kingdom that does not end, which is so different from every single thing in this world, everything else.
And though we are tempted to put our hope and our trust in things of this world, whether it be
the presence we're waiting for on Christmas morning, or money saved up in a bank account, or the people that we find joy in around us.
We know that everything in this life is temporary and fleeting, but his promises are eternal.
His promise is given to us as people.
So today we're invited to come and once again and see and hear and rejoice and celebrate in this good news that has been given to us and the hymn that we just sang
Verse four, oh ye heights of heaven adore him.
Angel hosts his praises sing.
Powers, dominions, bow before him and extol our God and King.
Let no tongue on earth be silent every voice in concert ring.
This is what we are invited to do this season.
To raise our voices with the voices of the angels and the powers on high, the heavenly dominion,
All of these, we're raising our voices with them, rejoicing at the Savior who has come.
The long-promised King who is here with us, and we are invited to receive him this season.
This morning for a few minutes, I want to reflect again.
We have this amazing passage in the book of Ephesians that tells us the meaning and significance of all that Jesus has done.
And as we receive it, I'd like to consider for a few minutes this morning how we respond.
How do we respond to this good news?
How do we not just receive it and hold it and consider it, but also how do we respond to it?
That's where we'll go this morning.
We see here in Ephesians chapter 1, the explanation of the meaning of what this significance is, of what Christ has done for us.
And it's huge, it's magnitudes.
It's weighty, it's glorious, it's holy, it's all these things because these are promises that are given to us that change our lives and change the world.
And though yes, we are people who are waiting still.
Some of this we can't see yet because we look to the day that is to come, the coming of Christ once again, when He will set all things straight, when all powers will truly rest under His authority in an eternal sort of way and when it will be made clear to us that He is the true King on the throne.
Yet even now we receive these promises and we know it's true for us.
His salvation has come and its forgiveness has come and so at verse seven we find in him we have redemption through his blood.
The forgiveness of our trespasses according to the rich of his grace which he lavishes upon us.
In all wisdom and insight making known to us the mystery of his will according to his purpose which set forth in Christ as a plan for the fullness of time.
A summary here in Ephesians chapter one of what God has done
creating a plan of salvation.
From the very foundations of the world, from the moment that humankind fell into sin, from the moment that sin entered into this world, God was preparing a plan of salvation.
Was already putting into work the steps that were needed in order for his own son, his very being to come into this world and even as a child.
And as he comes,
accomplishes all of these things.
He accomplishes the forgiveness of our trespasses.
He takes our sins upon himself.
He goes to the cross for the forgiveness of our sins.
He sheds his own blood.
He conquers death.
The very greatest of the curses which were placed upon Adam and Eve in the garden that they would face death, that they would die and would not live, that their lives would end.
And this promise Jesus overcomes.
He overcomes in his glory and his greatness and his humility and his sacrifice.
He goes to the cross overcoming death and rising again on the third day.
Amazing to think though as we do during the season that he came as a child and as an infant.
This is how we receive him.
This is how Mary and Joseph received him.
He came as an infant.
All the glory of God, all the majesty of God, all the truth of God who was the true king, the wisdom of God as we hear in these other
readings that the true wisdom of God shall come into the world.
And he comes as an infant, as one who could be held, as one who needed assistance from his parents, as it says in the gospel reading this morning, he rested under their authority.
He left the temple that day.
He came back and he was subservient to them as an infant.
He was as well.
Dorothy Sayers puts it like this, the incarnation means that for whatever reason God chose to let us fall to suffer and to be subject to the sorrows and death.
He has nonetheless had the honesty and the courage to take his own medicine.
He can exact nothing from man that he has not exacted from himself.
He himself has gone through the whole of human experience from the trivial, irrational, irritations of family life and the cramping restrictions of hard work and lack of money
to the worst horrors of pain and humiliation, defeat, despair, and death.
He was born in poverty and suffered infinite pain, all for us.
And he thought it well worth his while.
He willingly endured the human condition as what this means, and as an infant.
I can remember the wonder and mystery of bringing our first child home from the hospital and all the anxiety that was there with going through that process because it is an anxious time bringing a child into the world.
And you wouldn't know it now but she was born on the smaller side and so the doctors and nurses encouraged us.
We need to make sure she's getting enough to eat because her weight dropped in those first few days after being born.
So we had a little nervousness about all of that.
Hopefully the weight gain will come and it did over time.
But you see all of the meekness, all of the tenderness, all of the need that's wrapped up in an infant.
Truly helpless, relying on others to give everything that is needed and the fact that Jesus came into the world in this way.
The fact that God dwelt in an infant born into this world through this gift given to Mary who willingly became a servant of this process.
and God in all humility dwelt among us in that way.
It's still amazing to consider that the glory of God, the holiness of God, the righteousness of God, the justice of God, all of those properties and characteristics which God holds somehow dwelt in an infant and a child who was born in a very lowly way.
And as Dorothy sayers, he thought it was all well worth his while out of love for us, his people.
So now to consider for just a moment this morning, how do we respond?
How do we respond to this gift that is given?
Certainly we bring them our praise, our worship, our lives.
But a couple of things that Mary herself does, as she hears this promise given to her, some scholars have called Mary the first Christian, the first
Christian to have faith in this child because the promise was given to her first.
She saw this come forth into her life and then into the world.
She could be considered the very first Christian.
So how does Mary respond?
Because she offers to us a wonderful model to responding to these things.
First, faithful questioning.
We can do this in our lives as well.
And we ought to.
This could be also called studying.
It could be called reflecting on the Word of God.
It could be called considering
pondering, wondering at these things that God has done, faithful questioning.
Because when the angel comes to her, she says, how will this be?
Seeing that I have known not a man.
This is Mary's question to the angel.
How shall this be?
Amazingly, though, she's not chastised.
You remember the story of Zachariah?
When he also is met by an angel, he goes into the temple, he's ready to perform his priestly duties.
He's told that he also will receive the gift of a child, him and Elizabeth.
But he responds with a question, whereby shall I know this?
I'm using the King James version here.
Whereby shall I know this for?
And I am an old man and my wife, well stricken in years.
And the angel answered and said unto him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am I sent to speak unto thee and to show thee these glad tidings?
And then shortly thereafter, Zachariah was struck mute.
He essentially argued with an angel.
He asked his question, how can this be because we are old in age?
Gabriel chastises him.
Interestingly though, the same thing does not happen for Mary.
Mary is not struck mute.
She asked a question of the angel, also, how shall this be since I have known not a man?
So what is the difference between these two?
Maybe it is faithful questioning.
Certainly the angel could have known what's going on in their hearts could be directed by God at how to respond to these things.
But we get the idea that Zachariah responds with doubt to the angel's proclamation.
that his question doesn't come from a place of a faithful response or a trust, but rather a seed of doubt that's there in Zachariah's heart and mind as he receives this promise and he comes up with reasons why this can't be, we are old and age, don't you know?
Don't you know our age?
How can these things be?
This isn't possible for us.
And so Zachariah is struck mute by the angel.
But Mary's question, I think we could call faithful
Questioning, she says to the angel, how shall this be since I have no not a man?
The angel answered and said to her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee.
Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God."
And then Mary says a few verses later, behold, the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word and the angel departed from her.
This is her response, a question, how can this be?
How will this be?
How will this take place?
And then the response, behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
Be it unto me according to thy word."
And the angel departed from her.
Faithful questioning.
I do believe this is part of our Christian lives and we started with early on with Sunday school education and teaching our children to ask questions and to explore, to work through scripture and to read for themselves.
And then we go through the process of confirmation where we invite them.
Come forward with your questions, learn more for yourself, process your faith, confirm it and take it into your own hearts so that you too can know and hold this faith as your own.
Faithful questioning, but not a questioning that says these things cannot be possible for God.
But if these things are possible, then help me to see them also.
Faithful questioning our response.
Faithful questioning, as Mary questioned, was bold to question the angel, how shall these things take place?
And then in her response, behold, the handmaid of the Lord and be it unto me according to thy word, I am thy servant.
So number one, faithful questioning and number two, thoughtful pondering.
I'll ask one more question.
Have you made time to ponder these things this season?
It's the invitation of Advent is to await, to be patient, to make time, to come and see, to slow down, to look, to anticipate and expect all that God is doing our midst.
But of course, as I've said earlier,
This comes for us at the busiest time of the year.
We have all of these lists on our calendars leading up to that big day, and so it may chase out any time that we have for thoughtful pondering.
But this is the other response of Mary.
Faithful questioning, but then thoughtful pondering, she reflects on several different occasions.
In Luke 2, verse 19, it says, Mary kept all these things, and she pondered them.
in her heart.
Earlier in chapter one, she says, my soul magnifies the Lord and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.
My soul magnifies the Lord means to make great, means to compound and elevate and consider and look into.
Mary kept all these things and she pondered them in her heart.
For us as well, this is
a gift we are invited to receive with pondering and with wonder, to look in and to see.
We're told that even the angels long to see the gospel long to look into these same promises that God has given to us.
So how are you doing at pondering, that considering, at reflecting on, at stepping into, at looking at, and exploring
these promises that have been made to known to us, that have been given to us in a personal way that we are invited now to receive.
That word ponder in Greek, is symbolusa.
And it means actually to have a conversation, or at least that's one way it can be translated, sometimes pondering, sometimes conversing, or even to helper to meet.
But think about that for a moment.
A conversation within ourselves.
Seems to be what Mary is doing.
She sees first the gifts of God given to her that a child has come that all the promises of God are somehow wrapped up in this child.
This infant that she is now invited to take care of.
And then she steps back and she ponders.
She looks.
She treasures up.
She receives.
She holds.
And she considers she has a conversation within herself within her heart and mind of what all of this means.
And we too are invited to consider and to reflect.
So I'll give you that invitation one more time again today.
To faithful questioning, to seeing and exploring the promises of God, and how they are true for us, how they are made known to us, and how we are invited to come and look and see, and then thoughtful pondering, to reflect, to take time, to sit and wonder at the good things that God has done, and Jesus Christ our Lord, the very one,
who has come to give us redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the rich of his grace, which he has lavished upon us.
All of this, out of his love, for us is his people.
So let us give thanks this day.
We pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.
And by the congregation, to stand.
And by the peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in Christ, Jesus our Lord.
Amen.